ref/Elementary_List_Operations.md, before:

##  Elementary List Operations

###  Creating and Accessing Lists

#### Creating an integer sequence: `‹int1›..‹int2›`

**Description:**
The expression `‹int1›..‹int2›` creates a list of consecutive integers starting with `‹int1›` and ending with `‹int2›`.
If `‹int1›` is larger than `‹int2›`, then the empty list is returned.

    > 4..9
    < [4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9]
    > -2..2
    < [-2, -1, 0, 1, 2]
    > 4..1
    < []

------

#### The length of a list: `length(‹list›)`

**Description:**
This operator returns an integer that is equal to the number of elements in the `‹list›`.

    > length([2 ,5 ,7 ,3])
    < 4
    > length([2 ,[5, 4, 5] ,7 ,3]_2)
    < 3
    > length(1..1000)
    < 1000

Combining the `length` and the `repeat` operator allows one to list all elements of a list easily.

    > list = [2,3,5,7];
    > repeat(length(list),
    >    println(list_#);
    > )
    * 2
    * 3
    * 5
    * 7

One word of caution here: CindyScript is designed in such a way that it is seldom useful to traverse all the elements of a list using the `repeat` operator.
There are more elegant ways.

------

#### Testing for containment: `contains(‹list›,‹expr›)`

**Description:**
This operator returns either `true` or `false` depending on whether `‹list›` contains the element &lt;expr&gt;.

    > contains([1,3,4,5],4)
    < true
    > contains([1,3,4,5],7)
    < false
    > contains([1,3,4,5],2*2)
    < true

------

------

###  List Manipulation

#### Concatenation of lists: `concat(‹list1›,‹list2›)`

**Description:**
This operator creates a list by concatenation of two other lists.
This operator can equivalently be written as `‹list1›++‹list2›`.

    > concat(["a", "b"], ["c", "d"])
    < ["a", "b", "c", "d"]

------

#### Removing elements from lists: `remove(‹list1›,‹list2›)`

**Description:**
This operator creates a list by removing all elements that occur in `‹list2›` from `‹list1›`.
This operator can equivalently be written as `‹list1› -- ‹list2›`.

    > remove([1,3,4,5,1,5,6], [1,3,7])
    < [4, 5, 5, 6]
    > [1,3,4,5,1,5,6]--[1,3,7]
    < [4, 5, 5, 6]

------

#### Intersection of lists: `common(‹list1›,‹list2›)`

**Description:**
This operator creates a list collecting all elements that are in both `‹list1›` and `‹list1›`.
In the returned list the elements are sorted and each element occurs at most once.
This operator can equivalently be written as `‹list1›~~‹list2›`.

    > common([1,3,4,5,1,5,6], [1,3,7])
    < [1, 3]
    > [1,3,4,5,1,5,6]~~[1,3,7]
    < [1, 3]

------

#### Appending an element: `append(‹list›,‹expr›)`

**Description:**
This operator returns a list that is created by appending `‹expr›` to the list `‹list›` as its last element.
This operator can equivalently be written as `‹list›:>‹expr›`.

    > append(["a", "b", "c"], "d")
    < ["a", "b", "c", "d"]
    > ["a", "b", "c"]:>"d"
    < ["a", "b", "c", "d"]

------

#### Prepending an element: `prepend(‹expr›,‹list›)`

**Description:**
This operator returns a list that is created by prepending `‹expr›` to the list `‹list›` as its first element.
This operator can equivalently be written as `‹expr›<:‹list›`.

    > prepend("d",["a", "b", "c"])
    < ["d", "a", "b", "c"]
    > "d"<:["a", "b", "c"]
    < ["d", "a", "b", "c"]

------

###  Traversing Lists

#### The forall loop: `forall(‹list›,‹expr›)`

**Description:**
This operator is useful for applying an operation to all elements of a list.
It takes a `‹list›` as first argument.
It produces a loop in which `‹expr›` is evaluated for each entry of the list.
For each run, the run variable `#` takes the value of the corresponding list entry.

**Example:**

    > a=["this","is","a","list"];
    > forall(a,println(#))

This code fragment produces the output

    * this
    * is
    * a
    * list

------

#### The forall loop: `forall(‹list›,‹var›,‹expr›)`

**Description:**
Similar to `forall(‹list›,‹expr›)`, but the run variable is now named `‹var›`.
The variable is local to the expression.

    > v=994;
    > forall([1,2,3],v,println(v))
    * 1
    * 2
    * 3
    > v
    < 994

------

#### Applying an expression: `apply(‹list›,‹expr›)`

**Description:**
This operator generates a new list by applying the operation `‹expr›` to all elements of a list and collecting the results.
As usual, `#` is the run variable, which successively takes the value of each element in the list.

    > apply([1, 2, 3, 4, 5],#^2)
    < [1, 4, 9, 16, 25]
    > apply([1, 2, 3, 4, 5],#+5)
    < [6, 7, 8, 9, 10]
    > apply(1..5, [#,#^2])
    < [[1, 1], [2, 4], [3, 9], [4, 16], [5, 25]]

------

#### Applying an expression: `apply(‹list›,‹var›,‹expr›)`

**Description:**
Similar to `apply(‹list›,‹expr›)`, but the run variable is now named `‹var›`.
The variable is local to the expression.

    > v=995;
    > apply([1, 2, 3, 4, 5], v, v^2)
    < [1, 4, 9, 16, 25]
    > v
    < 995

------

#### Selecting elements of a list: `select(‹list›,‹boolexpr›)`

**Description:**
This operator selects all elements of a list for which a certain condition is satisfied.
The condition is supposed to be encoded by `‹boolexpr›`.
This expression is assumed to return a `‹bool›` value.
As usual, `#` is the run variable, which successively take the value of all elements in the list.

    > select(1..10, isodd(#))
    < [1, 3, 5, 7, 9]
    > select(0..10, #+# == #^2)
    < [0, 2]

A high-level application of the `select` operator is given by the following example:

    > divisors(x):=select(1..x,mod(x,#)==0);
    > primes(n):=select(1..n,length(divisors(#))==2);
    > println(primes(20))

It produces the output

    * [2, 3, 5, 7, 11, 13, 17, 19]

In this example, first a function `divisors(x)` is defined by selecting those numbers that divide `x` without any remainder.
Then a function `primes(n)` is defined that selects all numbers between `1` and `n` that have exactly two divisors.
These numbers are the primes.

------

#### Selecting elements of a list: `select(‹list›,‹var›,‹boolexpr›)`

**Description:**
Similar to `select(‹list›,‹boolexpr›)`, but the run variable is now named &lt;var&gt;.
The variable is local to the expression.

    > v = 996;
    > select(0..10, v, v+v == v^2)
    < [0, 2]
    > v
    < 996

Commit message:

Document the current language specification
Except for possible errors, this is the current interpretation of
CindyScript, as implemented by Cinderella and CindyJS.

ref/Elementary_List_Operations.md, after:

##  Elementary List Operations

###  Creating and Accessing Lists

#### Creating an integer sequence: `‹int1›..‹int2›`

**Description:**
The expression `‹int1›..‹int2›` creates a list of consecutive integers starting with `‹int1›` and ending with `‹int2›`.
If `‹int1›` is larger than `‹int2›`, then the empty list is returned.

    > 4..9
    < [4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9]
    > -2..2
    < [-2, -1, 0, 1, 2]
    > 4..1
    < []

------

#### The length of a list: `length(‹list›)`

**Description:**
This operator returns an integer that is equal to the number of elements in the `‹list›`.

    > length([2 ,5 ,7 ,3])
    < 4
    > length([2 ,[5, 4, 5] ,7 ,3]_2)
    < 3
    > length(1..1000)
    < 1000

Combining the `length` and the `repeat` operator allows one to list all elements of a list easily.

    > list = [2,3,5,7];
    > repeat(length(list),
    >    println(list_#);
    > )
    * 2
    * 3
    * 5
    * 7

One word of caution here: CindyScript is designed in such a way that it is seldom useful to traverse all the elements of a list using the `repeat` operator.
There are more elegant ways.

------

#### Testing for containment: `contains(‹list›,‹expr›)`

**Description:**
This operator returns either `true` or `false` depending on whether `‹list›` contains the element &lt;expr&gt;.

    > contains([1,3,4,5],4)
    < true
    > contains([1,3,4,5],7)
    < false
    > contains([1,3,4,5],2*2)
    < true

------

------

###  List Manipulation

#### Concatenation of lists: `‹list1› ++ ‹list2›`
#### Concatenation of lists function: `concat(‹list1›,‹list2›)`

**Description:**
This operator creates a list by concatenation of two other lists.

    > concat(["a", "b"], ["c", "d"])
    < ["a", "b", "c", "d"]

------

#### Removing elements from lists: `‹list1› -- ‹list2›`
#### Removing elements from lists function: `remove(‹list1›,‹list2›)`

**Description:**
This operator creates a list by removing all elements that occur in `‹list2›` from `‹list1›`.

    > remove([1,3,4,5,1,5,6], [1,3,7])
    < [4, 5, 5, 6]
    > [1,3,4,5,1,5,6]--[1,3,7]
    < [4, 5, 5, 6]

------

#### Intersection of lists: `‹list1› ~~ ‹list2›`
#### Intersection of lists function: `common(‹list1›,‹list2›)`

**Description:**
This operator creates a list collecting all elements that are in both `‹list1›` and `‹list1›`.
In the returned list the elements are sorted and each element occurs at most once.
This operator can equivalently be written as `‹list1›~~‹list2›`.

    > common([1,3,4,5,1,5,6], [1,3,7])
    < [1, 3]
    > [1,3,4,5,1,5,6]~~[1,3,7]
    < [1, 3]

------

#### Appending an element: `‹list› :> ‹expr›`
#### Appending an element function: `append(‹list›,‹expr›)`

**Description:**
This operator returns a list that is created by appending `‹expr›` to the list `‹list›` as its last element.

    > append(["a", "b", "c"], "d")
    < ["a", "b", "c", "d"]
    > ["a", "b", "c"]:>"d"
    < ["a", "b", "c", "d"]

------

#### Prepending an element: `‹expr› <: ‹list›`
#### Prepending an element function: `prepend(‹expr›,‹list›)`

**Description:**
This operator returns a list that is created by prepending `‹expr›` to the list `‹list›` as its first element.

    > prepend("d",["a", "b", "c"])
    < ["d", "a", "b", "c"]
    > "d"<:["a", "b", "c"]
    < ["d", "a", "b", "c"]

------

###  Traversing Lists

#### The forall loop: `forall(‹list›,‹expr›)`

**Description:**
This operator is useful for applying an operation to all elements of a list.
It takes a `‹list›` as first argument.
It produces a loop in which `‹expr›` is evaluated for each entry of the list.
For each run, the run variable `#` takes the value of the corresponding list entry.

**Example:**

    > a=["this","is","a","list"];
    > forall(a,println(#))

This code fragment produces the output

    * this
    * is
    * a
    * list

------

#### The forall loop: `forall(‹list›,‹var›,‹expr›)`

**Description:**
Similar to `forall(‹list›,‹expr›)`, but the run variable is now named `‹var›`.
The variable is local to the expression.

    > v=994;
    > forall([1,2,3],v,println(v))
    * 1
    * 2
    * 3
    > v
    < 994

------

#### Applying an expression: `apply(‹list›,‹expr›)`

**Description:**
This operator generates a new list by applying the operation `‹expr›` to all elements of a list and collecting the results.
As usual, `#` is the run variable, which successively takes the value of each element in the list.

    > apply([1, 2, 3, 4, 5],#^2)
    < [1, 4, 9, 16, 25]
    > apply([1, 2, 3, 4, 5],#+5)
    < [6, 7, 8, 9, 10]
    > apply(1..5, [#,#^2])
    < [[1, 1], [2, 4], [3, 9], [4, 16], [5, 25]]

------

#### Applying an expression: `apply(‹list›,‹var›,‹expr›)`

**Description:**
Similar to `apply(‹list›,‹expr›)`, but the run variable is now named `‹var›`.
The variable is local to the expression.

    > v=995;
    > apply([1, 2, 3, 4, 5], v, v^2)
    < [1, 4, 9, 16, 25]
    > v
    < 995

------

#### Selecting elements of a list: `select(‹list›,‹boolexpr›)`

**Description:**
This operator selects all elements of a list for which a certain condition is satisfied.
The condition is supposed to be encoded by `‹boolexpr›`.
This expression is assumed to return a `‹bool›` value.
As usual, `#` is the run variable, which successively take the value of all elements in the list.

    > select(1..10, isodd(#))
    < [1, 3, 5, 7, 9]
    > select(0..10, #+# == #^2)
    < [0, 2]

A high-level application of the `select` operator is given by the following example:

    > divisors(x):=select(1..x,mod(x,#)==0);
    > primes(n):=select(1..n,length(divisors(#))==2);
    > println(primes(20))

It produces the output

    * [2, 3, 5, 7, 11, 13, 17, 19]

In this example, first a function `divisors(x)` is defined by selecting those numbers that divide `x` without any remainder.
Then a function `primes(n)` is defined that selects all numbers between `1` and `n` that have exactly two divisors.
These numbers are the primes.

------

#### Selecting elements of a list: `select(‹list›,‹var›,‹boolexpr›)`

**Description:**
Similar to `select(‹list›,‹boolexpr›)`, but the run variable is now named &lt;var&gt;.
The variable is local to the expression.

    > v = 996;
    > select(0..10, v, v+v == v^2)
    < [0, 2]
    > v
    < 996
