plugins/cindygl/Primitives.md, before:

# Temporary documentation of primitive renderers for CindyGL3D

## Common modifiers

The following modiifers are present on all geoemetric primitives
* `color` the surface color <!-- TODO? list pre-defined colors-->
* `texture` the texture use to color the surface
<!--TODO? make colorExpr take both space and texture pos as parameters-->
* `colorExpr:(texturePos)` an explicit expression for the color at each pixel
* `alpha` the transparency for the given shape
* `light:(color,direction,normal)` a expression for computing the lighting at a given pixel depending on the surface color, view-direction and normal-vector, in addition to an explicit expression the following pre-defined values can be used:
  - `cglNoLight` return the color unmodified
  - `cglSimpleLight` change brigthness depending on angle between normal and view-direction
  - `cglDefaultLight` the default lighting engine <!--TODO? short descritption -->
* `plotModifiers` a dictionary mapping variable names to values, within the shader code (for instance in color or light expressions) reading one of the modifier variables will yield the value passed to the plot function independent of the current global value of that variable.
<!-- TODO plot modifiers can be modified using cglUpdate(objId,modiifers), TODO? write wrapper function -->

Points lines and circles aditionally have the modifier:
* `size` to specifiy the size (measured as a radius) of the drawn object

All spheres and points additionally allow the modifiers:

* `projection:(normal)` specifies the 2D texture coordinates for the point on the sphere with the given normal vector

For cylinders and lines there are additionall the following modifiers:

* `color1`, `color2`: the colors of the individual endpoints
* `projection:(normal,height,orientation)` specifies how the 2D texture-coordinates of a point on the cylinder are computed
* `caps`, `cap1`, `cap2`: the style(s) use for the end-caps of the cylinder possible values are:
    - `CylinderCapOpen` cut orthagonal to cylinder axis, draw back face (if visible)
    - `CylinderCapFlat` cut orthagonal to cylinder axis, draw a flat surface
    - `CylinderCapRound` cut orthagonal to cylinder axis, draw a round cap
    - `CylinderCapCutOpen(normal)` cut orthagonal to given normal vector, draw back face (if visible)
    - `CylinderCapCutFlat(normal)` cut orthagonal to given normal vector, draw a flat surface
    additionally the following values are used internally:
    - `CglCylinderCapVoid` cut orthagonal to cylinder axis, draw nothing
    - `CglCylinderCapCutVoid(normal)` cut orthagonal to given normal vector, draw nothing (used internally for "flat" joints)
    - `CglCylinderCapCutVoidRound(normal)` add round end-cap then cut orthagonal to given normal vector (used internally for round joints)

similarely connect and curve have the same cap modifiers as well as the modifiers:

<!-- TODO is curve the right word here -->
* `joints` the joint-style for connecting the segments of the curve possible values are:
  - `ConnectOpen` add no joints
  - `ConnectRound` join ends of cylinders with round cap
  - `ConnectFlat` cut both cylinders along common intersection plane

* `colors` individual colors for each joint (including the end-points)
* `closed` a boolean to specify if the two end-points of the curve should be connected


For triangles, polygons and meshes there are the following additional parameters:

* `colors` individual colors for each vertex
* `uv` the texture positions for each given vertex
* `normal` the normal vector to the polygon (does not exist for meshes)
* `normals` normal vectors at the individual vertices
* `normalExpr:(spacePos,texturePos)` gives a normal vector for each pixel depending on position in 3D-space and/or texture position
* `normalType` (does not exist for triangles) specifies how normals are computed/assigned to vertices, possible values are:
  - `NormalPerFace` assign a normal vector to each face
  - `NormalFlat` alias for `NormalPerFace` for use in `polygon3d(..)`
  - `NormalPerTriangle` assign a normal vector to each rendered triangle
  - `NormalPerVertex` assign a normal vector to each vertex
* `vertexModifiers` a dictionary mapping variable names to list of values (one for each vertex). The variables behave similarely to plotModifiers with the difference that the value of the variable will be linearly interpolated between the values at the vertices of the current triangle.

Surfaces and plots allow specifing:
<!--TODO? make space-color and texture color different modifiers-->
* `colorExpr:(x,y,z)` (instead of `colorExpr:texturePos`) gives a color for each pixel in 3D-space that can be used when rendering the shape
<!-- uv:?  a way to map surface to 2D coordinates -->
* `dF:(x,y,z)` (for surface) specify the normal vector for the surface point at the given space position
* `df:(x,y)` /  `df:(z)` (for plots) derivative of the plotted function at the given coordinates, can be used to simplify computation of normal vectors
* `cutoffRegion` region in 3D-space where the surface/plot should be rendered possible values are:
  - `CutoffScreenSphere` largest sphere fitting into current screen, updates depending on current zoom level
  - `CutoffScreenCylinder` largest cylinder fitting into current screen, updates depending on current zoom level
  - `CutoffScreenCylinder(orientation)` largest cylinder fitting into current screen rotated to the given orientation, updates depending on current zoom level
  - `CutoffSphere(center,radius)` a sphere with given center and radius
  - `CutoffCylinder(point1,point2,radius)` a cylinder with the given endpoints and radius
  - `CutoffCube(center,sideLength)` an axis-aligned cube with the given center and sideLengths
  - `CutoffCube(center,sideLength,up,front)` a cube with the given center and sidelength with axes pointing in directions `up` and `front`
  - `CutoffCuboid(center,v1,v2,v3)` a cuboid with the given center and axes
* `degree` the degree of the rendered surface (may be smaller than the actual degree), use a value of `-1` to specify a degree of infinity.


## Functions

CindyGL3D defines the following functions for drawing primitive objects:

* `draw3d(pos3d)` draw a point at position `pos3d`
* `draw3d(point1,point2)` draw a line between the two points `point1` and `point2`
* `sphere3d(center,radius)` draw a sphere with the given center and radius
* `cylinder3d(point1,point2,radius)` draw a cylinder with radius `radius` between the endpoints `point1` and `point2` 
* `connect3d(points)` connect the given points by lines
* `curve3d(expr:(t),from,to)` draw the curve specified by the given equation for `t` in the range `from` and `to`
    the modifier `samples` specifies how many sample-points should be used
* `circle3d(center,orientation,radius)` draws a circle with the given center and radius, in the plane with normal-vector pointing in orientation
* `torus3d(center,orientation,radius1,radius2)` draws a torus with the given center, and orientation with major radius `radius1` and minor radius `radius2`

* `triangle3d(p1,p2,p3)` draw a triangle with the given vertices
* `polygon3d(vertices)` draw a polygon with the given vertices, the modifier `triangulationMode` can be used to specify how the vertices are seperated into triangles, possible values are:
  - `TriangulateCorner` connect all vertices to first vertex
  - `TriangulateCenter` connect all vertices to additional vertex in center of polygon (mean of vertcies)
  - `TriangulateSpiral` cut of every second vertex until only 3-vertices are left

* `mesh3d(grid)` draws the rectangual mesh with the given sample points in grid, given as a rectangual matrix with in the form `grid_y_x`. It is expected that vertex data is given as retangual grids of the same shape. The modifier `topology` can be used to specify how the gird should be closed, possible values are:
  - `TopologyOpen` don't close shape
  - `TopologyCloseX` close shape in x-direction
  - `TopologyCloseY` close shape in y-direction
  - `TopologyCloseXY` close shape in both x- and y-direction (It is possible to combine a x and y topology by adding the corresponding constants)
If the topology in a direction is closed it is possible to give one additional row/column of vertex modifiers in that direction to specify the vertex data of the end-points when approaching from the other side of the boundry.

* `surface3d(expr:(x,y,z))` render the algebraic surface that is the zero-set of the given expression
* `plot3d(f:(x,y))` plot a 2D-function
* `complexplot3d(f:(z))` / `cplot3d(f:(z))` plot the magnitude of the given complex function, if no color is specified the points are colored using the phase of the function

Commit message:

correctly assign face and triangle normals for mesh3d

plugins/cindygl/Primitives.md, after:

# Temporary documentation of primitive renderers for CindyGL3D

## Common modifiers

The following modiifers are present on all geoemetric primitives
* `color` the surface color <!-- TODO? list pre-defined colors-->
* `texture` the texture use to color the surface
<!--TODO? make colorExpr take both space and texture pos as parameters-->
* `colorExpr:(texturePos)` an explicit expression for the color at each pixel
* `alpha` the transparency for the given shape
* `light:(color,direction,normal)` a expression for computing the lighting at a given pixel depending on the surface color, view-direction and normal-vector, in addition to an explicit expression the following pre-defined values can be used:
  - `cglNoLight` return the color unmodified
  - `cglSimpleLight` change brigthness depending on angle between normal and view-direction
  - `cglDefaultLight` the default lighting engine <!--TODO? short descritption -->
* `plotModifiers` a dictionary mapping variable names to values, within the shader code (for instance in color or light expressions) reading one of the modifier variables will yield the value passed to the plot function independent of the current global value of that variable.
<!-- TODO plot modifiers can be modified using cglUpdate(objId,modiifers), TODO? write wrapper function -->

Points lines and circles aditionally have the modifier:
* `size` to specifiy the size (measured as a radius) of the drawn object

All spheres and points additionally allow the modifiers:

* `projection:(normal)` specifies the 2D texture coordinates for the point on the sphere with the given normal vector

For cylinders and lines there are additionall the following modifiers:

* `color1`, `color2`: the colors of the individual endpoints
* `projection:(normal,height,orientation)` specifies how the 2D texture-coordinates of a point on the cylinder are computed
* `caps`, `cap1`, `cap2`: the style(s) use for the end-caps of the cylinder possible values are:
    - `CylinderCapOpen` cut orthagonal to cylinder axis, draw back face (if visible)
    - `CylinderCapFlat` cut orthagonal to cylinder axis, draw a flat surface
    - `CylinderCapRound` cut orthagonal to cylinder axis, draw a round cap
    - `CylinderCapCutOpen(normal)` cut orthagonal to given normal vector, draw back face (if visible)
    - `CylinderCapCutFlat(normal)` cut orthagonal to given normal vector, draw a flat surface
    additionally the following values are used internally:
    - `CglCylinderCapVoid` cut orthagonal to cylinder axis, draw nothing
    - `CglCylinderCapCutVoid(normal)` cut orthagonal to given normal vector, draw nothing (used internally for "flat" joints)
    - `CglCylinderCapCutVoidRound(normal)` add round end-cap then cut orthagonal to given normal vector (used internally for round joints)

similarely connect and curve have the same cap modifiers as well as the modifiers:

<!-- TODO is curve the right word here -->
* `joints` the joint-style for connecting the segments of the curve possible values are:
  - `ConnectOpen` add no joints
  - `ConnectRound` join ends of cylinders with round cap
  - `ConnectFlat` cut both cylinders along common intersection plane

* `colors` individual colors for each joint (including the end-points)
* `closed` a boolean to specify if the two end-points of the curve should be connected


For triangles, polygons and meshes there are the following additional parameters:

* `colors` individual colors for each vertex
* `uv` the texture positions for each given vertex
* `normal` the normal vector to the polygon (does not exist for meshes)
* `normals` normal vectors at the individual vertices
* `normalExpr:(spacePos,texturePos)` gives a normal vector for each pixel depending on position in 3D-space and/or texture position
* `normalType` (does not exist for triangles) specifies how normals are computed/assigned to vertices, possible values are:
  - `NormalPerFace` assign a normal vector to each face
  - `NormalFlat` alias for `NormalPerFace` for use in `polygon3d(..)`
  - `NormalPerTriangle` assign a normal vector to each rendered triangle
  - `NormalPerVertex` assign a normal vector to each vertex
* `vertexModifiers` a dictionary mapping variable names to list of values (one for each vertex). The variables behave similarely to plotModifiers with the difference that the value of the variable will be linearly interpolated between the values at the vertices of the current triangle.

Surfaces and plots allow specifing:
<!--TODO? make space-color and texture color different modifiers-->
* `colorExpr:(x,y,z)` (instead of `colorExpr:texturePos`) gives a color for each pixel in 3D-space that can be used when rendering the shape
<!-- uv:?  a way to map surface to 2D coordinates -->
* `dF:(x,y,z)` (for surface) specify the normal vector for the surface point at the given space position
* `df:(x,y)` /  `df:(z)` (for plots) derivative of the plotted function at the given coordinates, can be used to simplify computation of normal vectors
* `cutoffRegion` region in 3D-space where the surface/plot should be rendered possible values are:
  - `CutoffScreenSphere` largest sphere fitting into current screen, updates depending on current zoom level
  - `CutoffScreenCylinder` largest cylinder fitting into current screen, updates depending on current zoom level
  - `CutoffScreenCylinder(orientation)` largest cylinder fitting into current screen rotated to the given orientation, updates depending on current zoom level
  - `CutoffSphere(center,radius)` a sphere with given center and radius
  - `CutoffCylinder(point1,point2,radius)` a cylinder with the given endpoints and radius
  - `CutoffCube(center,sideLength)` an axis-aligned cube with the given center and sideLengths
  - `CutoffCube(center,sideLength,up,front)` a cube with the given center and sidelength with axes pointing in directions `up` and `front`
  - `CutoffCuboid(center,v1,v2,v3)` a cuboid with the given center and axes
* `degree` the degree of the rendered surface (may be smaller than the actual degree), use a value of `-1` to specify a degree of infinity.


## Functions

CindyGL3D defines the following functions for drawing primitive objects:

* `draw3d(pos3d)` draw a point at position `pos3d`
* `draw3d(point1,point2)` draw a line between the two points `point1` and `point2`
* `sphere3d(center,radius)` draw a sphere with the given center and radius
* `cylinder3d(point1,point2,radius)` draw a cylinder with radius `radius` between the endpoints `point1` and `point2` 
* `connect3d(points)` connect the given points by lines
* `curve3d(expr:(t),from,to)` draw the curve specified by the given equation for `t` in the range `from` and `to`
    the modifier `samples` specifies how many sample-points should be used
* `circle3d(center,orientation,radius)` draws a circle with the given center and radius, in the plane with normal-vector pointing in orientation
* `torus3d(center,orientation,radius1,radius2)` draws a torus with the given center, and orientation with major radius `radius1` and minor radius `radius2`

* `triangle3d(p1,p2,p3)` draw a triangle with the given vertices
* `polygon3d(vertices)` draw a polygon with the given vertices, the modifier `triangulationMode` can be used to specify how the vertices are seperated into triangles, possible values are:
  - `TriangulateCorner` connect all vertices to first vertex
  - `TriangulateCenter` connect all vertices to additional vertex in center of polygon (mean of vertcies)
  - `TriangulateSpiral` cut of every second vertex until only 3-vertices are left

* `mesh3d(grid)` draws the rectangual mesh with the given sample points in grid, given as a rectangual matrix with in the form `grid_y_x`. It is expected that vertex data is given as retangual grids of the same shape. The modifier `topology` can be used to specify how the gird should be closed, possible values are:
  - `TopologyOpen` don't close shape
  - `TopologyCloseX` close shape in x-direction
  - `TopologyCloseY` close shape in y-direction
  - `TopologyCloseXY` close shape in both x- and y-direction (It is possible to combine a x and y topology by adding the corresponding constants)
If the topology in a direction is closed it is possible to give one additional row/column of vertex modifiers in that direction to specify the vertex data of the end-points when approaching from the other side of the boundry.
When the normalType is per face the normal-vector of the top-left corner of each grid-cell will be used for that cell,
for normals per triangle the top-left and bottom right corners are used. <!--TODO formulation-->

* `surface3d(expr:(x,y,z))` render the algebraic surface that is the zero-set of the given expression
* `plot3d(f:(x,y))` plot a 2D-function
* `complexplot3d(f:(z))` / `cplot3d(f:(z))` plot the magnitude of the given complex function, if no color is specified the points are colored using the phase of the function
